Doctor Who is a British science-fiction television programme produced by the BBC from 1963 to the present day.
The programme depicts the adventures of the Doctor, a Time Lord—a time-travelling humanoid alien.
He explores the universe in his TARDIS, a sentient time-travelling space ship.
Its exterior appears as a blue British police box, which was a common sight in Britain in 1963 when the series first aired.
Along with a succession of companions, the Doctor faces a variety of foes while working to save civilisations, help ordinary people, and right wrongs.
The show is a significant part of British popular culture,[2][3] and elsewhere it has become a cult television favourite.
The show has influenced generations of British television professionals, many of whom grew up watching the series.[4]
The programme originally ran from 1963 to 1989.
After an unsuccessful attempt to revive regular production in 1996 with a backdoor pilot in the form of a television film, the programme was relaunched in 2005 by Russell T Davies who was showrunner and head writer for the first five years of its revival, produced in-house by BBC Wales in Cardiff.
The first series of the 21st century, featuring Christopher Eccleston in the title role, was produced by the BBC.
Series two and three had some development money contributed by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC), which was credited as a co-producer.[5]
Doctor Who also spawned spin-offs in multiple media, including Torchwood (2006–11) and The Sarah Jane Adventures (2007–11), both created by Russell T Davies; K-9 (2009–10); and a single pilot episode of K-9 and Company (1981).
There also have been many spoofs and cultural references of the character in other media.
Twelve actors have headlined the series as the Doctor.
The transition from one actor to another, and the differing approach to the role that they bring, is written into the plot of the show as regeneration into a new incarnation, a life process of Time Lords through which the character of the Doctor takes on a new body and, to some extent, new personality, which occurs after sustaining injury which would be fatal to most other species.
While each actor's portrayal differs, they are all intended to be aspects of the same character, and form part of the same storyline.
The time-travelling nature of the plot means that on occasion, story arcs have involved different Doctors meeting each other.
Peter Capaldi took on the role after Matt Smith's exit in the 2013 Christmas special, "The Time of the Doctor".[6]
Doctor Who first appeared on BBC1 television at 17:16:20 GMT, eighty seconds after the scheduled programme time, 5:15 pm, on Saturday, 23 November 1963.[7][8]
It was to be a regular weekly programme, each episode 25 minutes of transmission length.
Discussions and plans for the programme had been in progress for a year.
The head of drama, Canadian Sydney Newman, was mainly responsible for developing the programme, with the first format document for the series being written by Newman along with the head of the script department (later head of serials) Donald Wilson and staff writer C. E. Webber.
Writer Anthony Coburn, story editor David Whitaker and initial producer Verity Lambert also heavily contributed to the development of the series.[9][note 1]
The programme was originally intended to appeal to a family audience,[10] as an educational programme using time travel as a means to explore scientific ideas and famous moments in history.
On 31 July 1963 Whitaker commissioned Terry Nation to write a story under the title The Mutants.
As originally written, the Daleks and Thals were the victims of an alien neutron bomb attack but Nation later dropped the aliens and made the Daleks the aggressors.
When the script was presented to Newman and Wilson it was immediately rejected as the programme was not permitted to contain any "bug-eyed monsters".
The first serial had been completed and the BBC believed it was crucial that the next one be a success, however, The Mutants was the only script ready to go so the show had little choice but to use it.
According to producer Verity Lambert; "We didn't have a lot of choice — we only had the Dalek serial to go ...
We had a bit of a crisis of confidence because Donald [Wilson] was so adamant that we shouldn't make it.
Had we had anything else ready we would have made that." Nation's script became the second Doctor Who serial – The Daleks (aka The Mutants).
The serial introduced the eponymous aliens that would become the series' most popular monsters, and was responsible for the BBC's first merchandising boom.[11]
The BBC drama department's serials division produced the programme for 26 seasons, broadcast on BBC 1.
Falling viewing numbers, a decline in the public perception of the show and a less-prominent transmission slot saw production suspended in 1989 by Jonathan Powell, controller of BBC 1.[12]
Although (as series co-star Sophie Aldred reported in the documentary Doctor Who: More Than 30 Years in the TARDIS) it was effectively, if not formally, cancelled with the decision not to commission a planned 27th series of the show for transmission in 1990, the BBC repeatedly affirmed that the series would return.[13]
While in-house production had ceased, the BBC hoped to find an independent production company to relaunch the show.
Philip Segal, a British expatriate who worked for Columbia Pictures' television arm in the United States, had approached the BBC about such a venture as early as July 1989, while the 26th series was still in production.[13]
Segal's negotiations eventually led to a Doctor Who television film, broadcast on the Fox Network in 1996 as a co-production between Fox, Universal Pictures, the BBC and BBC Worldwide.
Although the film was successful in the UK (with 9.1 million viewers), it was less so in the United States and did not lead to a series.[13]
Licensed media such as novels and audio plays provided new stories, but as a television programme Doctor Who remained dormant until 2003.
In September of that year,[14]
BBC Television announced the in-house production of a new series after several years of attempts by BBC Worldwide to find backing for a feature film version.
The executive producers of the new incarnation of the series were writer Russell T Davies and BBC Cymru Wales head of drama Julie Gardner.
Doctor Who finally returned with the episode "Rose" on BBC One on 26 March 2005.[15]
There have since been eight further series in 2006–2008 and 2010–2014, and Christmas Day specials every year since 2005.
No full series was filmed in 2009,[16] although four additional specials starring Tennant were made.
In 2010, Steven Moffat replaced Davies as head writer and executive producer.[17]
The 2005 version of Doctor Who is a direct plot continuation of the original 1963–1989 series,[note 2]a s is the 1996 telefilm.
This differs from other series relaunches that have either been reimaginings or reboots (for example, Battlestar Galactica and Bionic Woman) or series taking place in the same universe as the original but in a different period and with different characters (for example, Star Trek: The Next Generation and spin-offs).[18]
The programme has been sold to many other countries worldwide (see Viewership).
It has been suggested that the transmission of the first episode was delayed by ten minutes due to extended news coverage of the assassination of US President John F.
Kennedy the previous day; whereas in fact, it went out just eighty seconds late.[19]
Because it was believed that the coverage of the events of the assassination as well as a series of power blackouts across the country may have caused too many viewers to miss this introduction to a new series, the BBC broadcast it again on 30 November 1963, just before the broadcast of episode two.[20][21]
The programme soon became a national institution in the United Kingdom, with a large following among the general viewing audience.[22][23]
Many renowned actors asked for, or were offered and accepted, guest-starring roles in various stories.[24][25][26][27]
With popularity came controversy over the show's suitability for children.
Morality campaigner Mary Whitehouse repeatedly complained to the BBC in the 1970s over what she saw as the show's frightening and gory content.[28]
John Nathan-Turner, who produced the series during the 1980s, was heard to say that he looked forward to Whitehouse's comments, as the show's ratings would increase soon after she had made them.[29]
The phrase "Hiding behind (or 'watching from behind') the sofa" became coined and entered British pop culture, signifying in humour the stereotypical early-series behaviour of children who wanted to avoid seeing frightening parts of a television programme while remaining in the room to watch the remainder of it.[30]
The phrase retains this association with Doctor Who, to the point that in 1991 the Museum of the Moving Image in London named their exhibition celebrating the programme "Behind the Sofa".
The electronic theme music too was perceived as eerie, novel, and frightening, at the time.
A 2012 article placed this childhood juxtapose of fear and thrill "at the center of many people's relationship with the show",[31] and a 2011 online vote at Digital Spy deemed the series the "scariest TV show of all time".[32]
During Jon Pertwee's second series as the Doctor, in the serial Terror of the Autons (1971), images of murderous plastic dolls, daffodils killing unsuspecting victims, and blank-featured policemen marked the apex of the show's ability to frighten children.[33]
Other notable moments in that decade include a disembodied brain falling to the floor in The Brain of Morbius[34] and the Doctor apparently being drowned by Chancellor Goth in The Deadly Assassin (both 1976).[35]
The fibreglass TARDIS prop used between 1980 and 1989.
A BBC audience research survey conducted in 1972 found that, by their own definition of violence ("any act[s] which may cause physical and/or psychological injury, hurt or death to persons, animals or property, whether intentional or accidental") Doctor Who was the most violent of the drama programmes the corporation produced at the time.[36]
The same report found that 3% of the surveyed audience regarded the show as "very unsuitable" for family viewing.[37]
Responding to the findings of the survey in The Times newspaper, journalist Philip Howard maintained that, "to compare the violence of Dr Who, sired by a horse-laugh out of a nightmare, with the more realistic violence of other television series, where actors who look like human beings bleed paint that looks like blood, is like comparing Monopoly with the property market in London: both are fantasies, but one is meant to be taken seriously."[36]
The image of the TARDIS has become firmly linked to the show in the public's consciousness; BBC scriptwriter Anthony Coburn, who lived in the resort of Herne Bay, Kent, was one of the people who conceived the idea of a police box as a time machine.[38]
In 1996, the BBC applied for a trade mark to use the TARDIS' blue police box design in merchandising associated with Doctor Who.[39]
In 1998, the Metropolitan Police Authority filed an objection to the trade mark claim; but in 2002, the Patent Office ruled in favour of the BBC.[40]
The programme's broad appeal attracts audiences of children and families as well as science fiction fans.[41]
The 21st century revival of the programme has become the centrepiece of BBC One's Saturday schedule, and has, "defined the channel".[42]
Since its return, Doctor Who has consistently received high ratings, both in number of viewers and as measured by the Appreciation Index.[43]
In 2007, Caitlin Moran, television reviewer for The Times, wrote that Doctor Who is, "quintessential to being British".[3]
Director Steven Spielberg has commented that, "the world would be a poorer place without Doctor Who".[44]
On 4 August 2013, a live programme titled Doctor Who Live: The Next Doctor was broadcast on BBC One, during which the actor playing the Twelfth Doctor was revealed.[45]
The show was simultaneously broadcast in the US and Australia.[46]
