Star Trek is an American science fiction entertainment franchise created by Gene Roddenberry and under the ownership of CBS and Paramount.[Note 1]
Star Trek: The Original Series and its live action TV spin-off shows, Star Trek: The Next Generation, Star Trek: Deep Space Nine, Star Trek: Voyager, and Star Trek: Enterprise as well as the Star Trek film series make up the main canon, while the canonicity of Star Trek: The Animated Series is debated and the expansive library of Star Trek novels and comics whilst still part of the franchise, are generally considered non-canon.[Note 2]
The first series, now referred to as "The Original Series", debuted in 1966 and ran for three seasons on NBC.
It followed the interstellar adventures of James T.
Kirk and the crew of the starship Enterprise, an exploration vessel of a 23rd-century interstellar "United Federation of Planets".
In creating the first "Star Trek", Roddenberry was inspired by Westerns such as Wagon Train, along with the Horatio Hornblower novels and Gulliver's Travels.
These adventures continued in the short-lived Star Trek: The Animated Series and six feature films.
Four spin-off television series were eventually produced: Star Trek: The Next Generation, followed the crew of a new starship Enterprise set a century after the original series; Star Trek: Deep Space Nine and Star Trek: Voyager, set contemporaneously with The Next Generation; and Star Trek: Enterprise, set before the original series, in the early days of human interstellar travel.
Four additional The Next Generation feature films were produced.
In 2009, the film franchise underwent a relaunch with a prequel to the original series set in an alternate timeline titled simply Star Trek.
This film featured a new cast portraying younger versions of the crew from the original Enterprise.[Note 3]
A sequel to this film, Star Trek Into Darkness, premiered on May 16, 2013.
Star Trek has been a cult phenomenon for decades.[1]
Fans of the franchise are called Trekkies or Trekkers.
The franchise spans a wide range of spin-offs including games, figurines, novels, toys, and comics.
Star Trek had a themed attraction in Las Vegas which opened in 1998 and closed in September 2008.
At least two museum exhibits of props travel the world.
The series has its own full-fledged constructed language, Klingon.
Several parodies have been made of Star Trek.
Its fans, despite the end of Star Trek episodes on TV, have produced several fan productions to fill that void.
Star Trek is noted for its influence on the world outside of science fiction.
It has been cited as an inspiration for several technological inventions such as the cell phone.
Moreover, the show is noted for its progressive civil rights stances.
The original series included one of television's first multiracial casts.
Star Trek references can be found throughout popular culture from movies such as the submarine thriller Crimson Tide to the cartoon series South Park.
As early as 1964, Gene Roddenberry drafted a proposal for the science fiction series that would become Star Trek.
Although he publicly marketed it as a Western in outer space—a so-called "Wagon Train to the Stars" (like the popular Western TV series)[2]—he privately told friends that he was modeling it on Jonathan Swift's Gulliver's Travels, intending each episode to act on two levels: as a suspenseful adventure story and as a morality tale.[3]
Most Star Trek stories depict the adventures of humans[Note 4] and aliens who serve in Starfleet, the space-borne humanitarian and peacekeeping armada of the United Federation of Planets.
The protagonists have altruistic values, and must apply these ideals to difficult dilemmas.
Many of the conflicts and political dimensions of Star Trek represent allegories of contemporary cultural realities.
Star Trek: The Original Series addressed issues of the 1960s,[4] just as later spin-offs have reflected issues of their respective decades.
Issues depicted in the various series include war and peace, the value of personal loyalty, authoritarianism, imperialism, class warfare, economics, racism, religion, human rights, sexism, feminism, and the role of technology.[5]
Roddenberry stated: "[By creating] a new world with new rules, I could make statements about sex, religion, Vietnam, politics, and intercontinental missiles.
Indeed, we did make them on Star Trek: we were sending messages and fortunately they all got by the network."[6]
Roddenberry intended the show to have a highly progressive political agenda reflective of the emerging counter-culture of the youth movement, though he was not fully forthcoming to the networks about this.
He wanted Star Trek to show humanity what it might develop into, if only it would learn from the lessons of the past, most specifically by ending violence.
An extreme example is the alien species, the Vulcans, who had a violent past but learned to control their emotions.
Roddenberry also gave Star Trek an anti-war message and depicted the United Federation of Planets as an ideal, optimistic version of the United Nations.[7]
His efforts were opposed by the network because of concerns over marketability, e.g., they opposed Roddenberry's insistence that the Enterprise have a racially diverse crew.[8]
However, Star Trek has also been accused of evincing racism and imperialism by frequently depicting Starfleet and the Federation trying to impose their values and customs on other planets.[9][10]
In 1964, Roddenberry proposed the original Star Trek TV series to Desilu Studios as "like Wagon Train, a Wagon Train to the stars."[11]
The network rejected the show's first pilot, "The Cage", starring Jeffrey Hunter as Enterprise Captain Christopher Pike; however, NBC executives, still impressed with the concept, made the unusual decision to commission a second pilot: "Where No Man Has Gone Before".
The first regular episode ("The Man Trap") of Star Trek aired on Thursday, September 8, 1966.[12]
While the show initially enjoyed high ratings, the average rating of the show at the end of its first season dropped to 52nd (out of 94 programs).
Unhappy with the show's ratings, NBC threatened to cancel the show during its second season.[13]
The show's fan base, led by Bjo Trimble, conducted an unprecedented letter-writing campaign, petitioning the network to keep the show on the air.[14][15]
NBC renewed the show, but moved it from primetime to the "Friday night death slot", and substantially reduced its budget.[16]
In protest Roddenberry resigned as producer and reduced his direct involvement in Star Trek which led to Fred Freiberger becoming producer for the show's third and final season.[Note 5]
Despite the protests of a renewed letter-writing campaign, NBC cancelled the series.
After the original series was cancelled, Paramount Studios, who had bought the series from Desilu, licensed the broadcast syndication rights to help recoup the production losses.
Reruns began in the fall of 1969 and by the late 1970s the series aired in over 150 domestic and 60 international markets.
This helped Star Trek develop a cult following greater than its popularity during its original run.[17]
One sign of the series' growing popularity was the first Star Trek convention which occurred on January 21–23, 1972 in New York City.
Although the original estimate of attendees was only a few hundred, several thousand fans turned up.
Star Trek fans continue to attend similar conventions worldwide.[18]
The series' newfound success led to the idea of reviving the franchise.[19]
Filmation with Paramount Television produced the first post original series show, Star Trek: The Animated Series.
It ran on NBC for 22 half-hour episodes over two seasons on Saturday mornings from 1973 to 1974.
Although short lived, typical for animated productions in that time slot during that period, the series garnered the franchise's only "Best Series" Emmy Award as opposed to the franchise's later technical ones.
Paramount Pictures and Roddenberry began developing a new series, Star Trek: Phase II, in May 1975 in response to the franchise's newfound popularity.
However, work on the series ended when the proposed Paramount Television Service folded.
Following the success of the science fiction movies Star Wars and Close Encounters of the Third Kind, Paramount adapted the planned pilot episode of Phase II into the feature film, Star Trek: The Motion Picture.
The film opened in North America on December 7, 1979, with mixed reviews from critics.
The film earned $139 million worldwide, below expectations but enough for Paramount to create a sequel.
The studio forced Roddenberry to relinquish creative control of future sequels.
The success of the critically acclaimed sequel, Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan, reversed the fortunes of the franchise.
While the sequel grossed less than the first movie, The Wrath of Khan's lower production costs made it net more profit.
Paramount produced six Star Trek feature films between 1979 and 1991.
In response to the popularity of Star Trek feature films, the franchise returned to television with Star Trek: The Next Generation (TNG) in 1987.
Paramount chose to distribute it as a first-run syndication show rather than a network show.[20]
